Titulo: Opening remarks by Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the World Bank Treasury’s RAMP-Africa Workshop in Cape Town, 13 June 2011
Data: 2011-06-13
Palestrante (estimado): Daniel Mminele
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2011/324
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2011/324/RAMP--Africa-workshop_speech.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Opening remarks by Mr. Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor,
South African Reserve Bank, at the World Bank Treasury’s RAMP-Africa
Workshop in Cape Town, 13 June 2011
1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen, good morning to you all.
Let me take this opportunity to welcome you to our country and the beautiful city of
Cape Town. I trust that you will gain much through the interactions at this RAMP-
Africa Workshop on Governance and Oversight of Investment Management. I would
like to express my gratitude to the World Bank Treasury not only for the great
initiative that RAMP-Africa is, but also for choosing South Africa as the host country
to bring together central bankers from all over the African continent. The networking
opportunities, the transfer of knowledge between participants, capacity building and
the deepening of skills in the management, governance and oversight of foreign
exchange reserves, are the key benefits provided by workshops such as this one.
My task for now is to provide some general thoughts about governance in reserves
management. In a later session, I will share more specifically the particular
experiences of the South African Reserve Bank, which has come a long way since
the establishment of the Reserves Management Unit in our Financial Markets
Department over a decade ago.
- 1 -
2. Significant growth in foreign exchange reserves
The question of reserves management has gathered prominence given the
phenomenal growth in global foreign exchange reserves over the past decade, from
USD2,8 trillion in 2003 to around USD9,7 trillion in April 2011. Emerging markets
have accumulated substantial amounts of reserves and account for US$7,4 trillion of
these global reserve assets, with China holding US$3,0 trillion. The surge in foreign
exchange reserves in emerging markets has been informed by both the enormous
amount of capital flowing into these countries and efforts to stem the tide of currency
appreciation, as well as by very deliberate strategies to create buffers that would put
countries in a better position to deal with external shocks. Clearly, the traditional
motive for holding reserves, namely to offset balance of payments fluctuations, has
since become less of a consideration. JP Morgan1 estimates that countries like
China and Brazil have 1,5 to 2 years’ worth of import cover, while the largest
reserves holders have sufficient reserves to pay off short-term debt five to ten times
over.
During the global financial crisis, central banks were in the eye of the storm,
challenged not only in our traditional role of monetary policy formulation and
implementation, but also as reserves managers. The Governor of the Bank of
England, Sir Mervyn King, back in 2003 characterised the 10 years up to the mid-
2000s as the “NICE” decade. “NICE” meant: Non-Inflationary Continuous Expansion.
He was referring to a relatively comfortable period for policy makers, during which
they witnessed relatively stable inflation, good growth rates and few shocks to
economies.
He could have just as well used the term “NICE” to describe the space that official
sector reserves managers found themselves in, in the aftermath of the Asian
financial crisis. The reserves that they had to manage were increasing rapidly,
allowing many to accelerate the transition from liquidity management to investment
management, facilitating the discovery of new asset classes, and the diversification
into riskier assets by way of enhancing returns, managing to attract new skills, and in
1 Economic Research Note, Global FX reserves on pace to top US$11 trillion in 2011, May 6, 2011
- 2 -
certain cases making it increasingly difficult to tell the difference between official
sector managers and private sector managers, given how fast their reserves
management practices were converging.
As we know, it did not end very nicely! Many of these assets suffered substantial
losses in the wake of the financial crisis starting in 2007, especially at the height of it
in 2008 and 2009. In many instances, the risk-return profiles turned out to be
somewhat different from what had been anticipated. Many reserves managers found
themselves having to answer very difficult questions, and also forced to introduce
very drastic risk reduction measures, at a time when it was not going to be only most
costly given the frenzy in markets, but also at a time when they would add to already
heightened financial stability risks. Whether the crisis will lead to lasting reversals
and a fundamental rethink of what official reserves management should be about,
very much remains to be seen.
What is clear though, is that the surge in global international reserves, and the most
recent financial crisis, have brought central banks to the attention of stakeholders,
increasing the level of scrutiny regarding how they manage reserves given the rising
opportunity cost of holding these reserves, the high costs of sterilising foreign
exchange purchases, and financial stability considerations when investing reserves
during financial crises.
3. Governance, accountability and oversight of investment management
Sound governance and oversight around the management and investment of foreign
assets has become a critical discussion point in central banks and governments
globally, especially so following the financial crisis. The ability of central banks to
make decisions and respond to specific market developments within a sound risk
management framework were tested during the financial crisis, especially in 2008,
when capital markets malfunctioned and liquidity become a major constraint. At the
time, potential systemic risks in the banking sector required a tightening of risk
management principles and adherence to investment objectives, placing greater
emphasis on liquidity considerations in terms of the asset classes in which reserves
portfolios are invested. Central banks generally have a large proportion of reserves
- 3 -
invested in highly liquid fixed income assets, including in short-term bank deposits.
At the peak of the financial crisis, default risk was high and central banks withdrew
their investments in the banking sector, which was in desperate need of funding.2
Although these actions were plausible from an individual reserve manager’s
perspective, the collective withdrawal exacerbated the already tight funding situation
of commercial banks. This pro-cyclical behaviour of reserves managers during crises
may conflict with central bank’s objective of maintaining financial stability, which
again highlights the need for sound governance and oversight in the investment of
reserves, as well as an element of coordination with other functions of the central
bank.
Furthermore, foreign exchange reserves make up a significant component of the
total assets on the balance sheets of emerging market central banks. Due to this
concentration, central banks are subject to stringent reporting requirements from the
general public, governments and, where relevant, shareholders. To this end, central
banks have been developing sound governance structures, improving accountability
and introducing a culture of higher risk awareness across all their operational
activities. Efficient management of foreign exchange reserves has become vital for
maintaining sound perceptions of central bank credibility. One cannot exclude spill
over effects that a loss of reputation and credibility through bad governance in
reserves management could have on a central bank’s primary tasks of ensuring
monetary and financial stability.
Good governance and sound functional organisational structures are therefore
necessary for the efficient management of reserves. In establishing these structures,
accountability, roles and responsibility should be appropriately defined, adopted and
institutionalised.
There are two dimensions to consider in governance - vertical and horizontal
governance3. Vertical governance ensures that decisions are taken at the right level
2
Jukka Pihlman and Han van der Hoorn (2010), Procyclicality in Central Bank Reserve Management:
Evidence from the Crisis, IMF Working Paper
3 Claudio Borio, Jannecke Ebbesen, Gabriele Galati and Alexandra Heath (2008), FX reserve
management: elements of a framework, Bank for International Settlements Working Paper No. 38
- 4 -
(senior executives), that is, where the strategic direction of the organisation is
established. Senior management of the institution should carry out the responsibility
of oversight on the investment process and management of reserves. Horizontal
governance ensures that business areas and reporting lines are organised in a way
that minimises the potential for conflict of interest. The senior governing body needs
to provide oversight and determine risk tolerance for the institution, while an
investment committee should be responsible for establishing the investment policy
and guidelines. Consequently, trading activities needs to be separated from middle
office functions of risk management and reporting, as well as from the accounting
and settlement areas.
4. Current challenges in reserves management
As I come to the end of my remarks, let me leave you with what are generally
thought to be the key questions currently facing reserves managers and some of
these issues will feature on your programme during the next few days:
• Do we need to need to redefine what is an acceptable risk-return balance for
official reserves and think differently about risk tolerance?
• As we are central banks, what is an acceptable level of trade-off between risk
management and financial stability? A recent IMF paper dealt with this, pointing
to the pro-cyclical behaviour of central banks when withdrawing deposits from
commercial banks during the crisis.
• Does this issue point to the need for greater segregation between reserves that
are held for policy purposes (i.e. monetary policy, intervention, etc.) and those
that are purely for investments. Should the latter portion be with central banks, or
separate investment agencies?
• Does return enhancement need to be again more clearly subordinated to liquidity
considerations?
The answers to the above questions could have all manner of implications for central
bank reserves management and trigger yet another set of challenges. Could the
outcome be that the pendulum swings all the way back to the other extreme, namely
that central banks become overly risk-averse? Are we going to find it difficult to retain
- 5 -
staff members that were attracted to central banks, because of the increased level of
sophistication, which they may feel might be going into reverse?
Luckily, all I have to do today is table these questions and leave you to mull over
some of them in the next few days.
What is beyond doubt is that proper governance and oversight of investment
management, having being highlighted during the crisis, has become even more
important. The crisis impacted portfolio performance and as a result tighter risk
management frameworks had to be implemented. Given the rising challenges faced
by reserves portfolios in this low global interest rate environment, the investment
processes must remain guided by sound investment principles and solid risk
management policies, which are supported by effective information technology
platforms, all of that enveloped by good governance and oversight structures.
I trust that you will glean useful information from this workshop, and that it will assist
your respective institutions in strengthening reserves management operations and
their oversight. The agenda certainly looks very promising in this regard.
Enjoy the workshop.
Thank you
- 6 -